---
title: Breaking a .pacnew Merge
date: 2024-10-23
author: Tom Marks
...

## A Normal Day in Arch Linux 

Today my day started as many days have started before. I logged in to my PC, checked [archlinux.org](https://archlinux.org) for
any important news, and ran a system update:

```shell
$ pacman -Syu
```

I ususally manage my own AUR dependencies, having not dabbled into the world of `yay` yet. Today
I was greeted with an incompatibility that I couldn't easily resolve - I've been busy and it has
been over 3 weeks since my last update! Rolling releases don't like it when the rolling stops.
Motivated to just keep moving, and not particularly fussed over my install of `aseprite`, I removed the package
causing the problem and carried on.

```shell
$ pacman -R aseprite
$ pacman -Syu
```

This was a large update, due to the time that had passed. Several GB (or Gb? I am never fully sure)
of data flowed through the internet into my machine. I realized that I hadn't merged any `.pacnew` files
for a while. But what is a `.pacnew` file? When some default configuration files change (especially important ones
like `/etc/sshd/sshd_config`), pacman helpfully puts the changes in a `.pacnew` file, and merging these
changes into your config is left as an exercise for the system administrator.

Some people just groaned reading that, but I love this philosophy of handling updates. 
I love Arch Linux because there is no magic. If important configuration options are added to a core utility, 
I want to know about them and make an informed decision about how to merge them into my config.

Today, there were a few _really_ important `.pacnew` files I had left unmerged for too long. One was
for `/etc/shells`, a file listing valid login shells. `/etc/passwd` is a critical system file that is used in Unix systems that is used as part of user login.
The actual passwords don't live here in any sensible system, but it is an important and very old part
of user authentication, with contents including a user's login shell. If a user's login shell is not in `/etc/shells`, they cannot login. Emboldened by what looked to be trivial changes, I performed the merges by hand
with confidence, but I didn't consider investigating any secondary files such as `/etc/password` which could also be impacted.

I was able to update everything in-place without rebooting and continue using my computer. 
Later when attempting to use a USB controller, it wasn't being detected - I needed to reboot to reload
the USB drivers in the new kernel. Upon rebooting I was greeted with my favourite login prompt, the 
plaintext console:

```shell
Arch Linux 6.11.4-zen2-1-zen (tty1)

lassie login: _
```

I type my username and password... `Login incorrect`. It must have been a typo, so I try again. And again.
Have I forgotten my password? Then I considered the `.pacnew` changes and realize I must have broken user authentication!
I don't have any other users configured that I can try logging in as, so I can't tell if this is local to
my user or system-wide. It's possible that me being the only user makes this a system-wide error by default!

## USB To The Rescue

I have at least 2 Arch Linux boot USBs floating around in drawes and containers. The Arch Linux
installer is actually just Arch Linux, so as a nice 
side-effect of this you are left with an extremely useful recovery device when you install from
a USB.
The first step was finding a boot USB. This took longer than I expected.

The first USB refused to boot. I looked around its contents on my laptop, noting that it had a kernel and all the
other things needed to run an OS. I can't tell why it can't boot, but I spend at least 20mins
trying, and looking at BIOS settings on my PC.

I spend even longer hunting for the second USB. I pull 3 USBs out of a box, and none of them have been used in over a year, but
I suspect one of them boots Arch Linux. My first guess is correct, and I'm back in business on my main PC.

## The Plan

I have broken something in `/etc`. Maybe I broke `/etc/passwd`, but I also changed `/etc/shells`. I need to mount
the partition of my OS that contains `/etc`, examine my system files, then correct any errors. 
To do this, I'm going to assume `root` control of my installed OS from the boot USB.

The first step is to find `/etc`. I have a few drives installed in my PC, from `sda` to `sde`, 13 paritions all up.
I was excited about partitions when I installed this OS, I'm not sure I would use so many paritions next time.
I notice that `/dev/sdb` has the most partitions, and I'm pretty sure this drive has most of my Linux
filesystem. It's time to start mounting stuff!

```shell
root@archiso ~ # mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt
root@archiso ~ # ls /mnt
EFI screenshot_001.bmp
```

This is clearly my EFI partition. Why is there a screenshot here? 🤔

```shell
root@archiso ~ # umount /mnt
root@archiso ~ # mount /dev/sdb2 /mnt
root@archiso ~ # ls /mnt
bin boot data dev etc home lib lib64 lost+found media mnt opt proc root run sbin shared src sys tmp usr var
root@archiso ~ # ls /mnt/etc
\snipped for brevity
```

Success! And I can verify that the contents of `/etc` are really here! I try to open the file
and realize that while we have `vim`, `vi` is not symlinked to `vim`. 
I thought that was fairly standard,
and it catches me off guard every time I use the Arch boot USB. On my system `vi` is symlinked to `nvim`. So I investigate this file using `vim`:

```shell
root@archiso ~ # vim /mnt/etc/passwd
```

Finding my passwd entry in this file:

```
tom:x:1000:1000::/home/tom:/bin/zsh
```

I remember one of the changes in the `.pacnew` files was moving from `/bin/bash` to `/usr/bin/bash`,
because we all agreed that we're doing things in `/usr/bin` now (except for when we don't). I noticed
that my `/etc/shells` entry for ZSH was also using `/bin/zsh`, so I helpfully changed that to `/usr/bin/zsh`.
On no, now my `passwd` file does not contain a valid shell!

## Verification

One important step to minimize slow USB rebooting is to try logging in from this USB environment.
We can use the currently loaded kernel, but rebase ourselves into a different filesystem using the `chroot`
command. This would mean we are acting as if we were the `root` user of my real PC Linux install, but 
running on whatever version of the kernel was on this USB. I'm sure there will be no problems with this
despite the age of the USB.

Before I can `chroot` I need to mount my remaining filesystem into `/mnt`

```shell
root@archiso ~ # mount /dev/sdb3 /mnt/var
root@archiso ~ # mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 /mnt/home
root@archiso ~ # swapon /dev/sdb5
```

I'm not sure if I need to manually enable the same swap partition, but it's present in what will
become `/etc/fstab` so it's probably wise. I have a few other partitions for misc data (eg `/home/tom/workspace`) 
but these aren't critical for this recovery mission. Let's see if we can `chroot` and `su` into my `tom`
user!

```shell
root@archiso ~ # chroot /mnt
archiso# su tom
tom@archiso> 
```

It looks like `su` bypasses whatever login mechanism checks `/etc/shells`, 
and while that isn't useful to me now it's worth taking note of - If I had root login with a password
enabled then I'd be able to fix this without the rescue USB. I'm not sure disabling that has meaningfully more security when
I store a boot USB capable of building this `chroot` environment within 2m of my PC.

One cool thing is that we can now use `vi` and it picks up my symlink to my `nvim` - we're using my `/usr/bin` now!

At the very least I can make sure that `/usr/bin/zsh` is a real shell once I am logged in:
```shell
tom@archiso> echo $SHELL
/bin/zsh
tom@archiso> ^D
archiso# vi /etc/passwd
archiso# su tom
tom@archiso> echo $SHELL
/usr/bin/zsh
```

After double checking this shell is in `/etc/shells`, I rebooted and...

As I'm typing this final line on my PC, it's safe to say that we're back 😎

