---
title: Website Launch and How I Built It
date: 2021-07-15
author: Tom Marks
updated: 2021-12-20
...

*Updated December 2021*

## Welcome

My website is alive! I'm excited to finally have a space on the internet
dedicated to my programming. I intend to start a Youtube channel with some 
programming content soon, and might do some coding streams on 
Twitch. This is the beginning of my online "brand".

## How it Works

I'm launching this site using Netlify's static site hosting. This has worked
well for me in the past, and is a good simple option for a site like this -
static content which is built once at runtime using simple scripts.

I have been playing around with different simple layouts for a while, and 
compared a few static site generators like Jekyll and [makefile-blog](https://github.com/ozy/makefile-blog)
but ultimately decided to build my own generator. I don't need many bells
and whistles.

The source for this site is [on github](https://github.com/phy1um/coding.tommarks.xyz).

### Generating Pages

The first part of the generator builds the main pages. These are the
things you reach from the navigation at the top of the page, such as
`index.html` or `projects.html`. These main body of these pages are written in
the `src/` directory, but the common header and footer components are stored
in `tmp-header.html` and `tmp-footer.html`. A full page is generated by
concatenating the header, page body and footer. From `make-site.sh`:

> `cat "src/tmp-header.html" "$1" "src/tmp-footer.html"`

### Generating a Blog

Blog posts are a tiny bit more involved. The content is authored in Markdown,
then rendered to HTML using `pandoc` using a `pandoc` template `src/tmp-blog-post.html`.
This is then concatenated with the header and footer, like any other page.
Blog posts have special metadata that other pages do not. This will
hopefully be expanded in the future, and can be used to generate things
such as RSS feeds.

## The Good
* Simple site, easy to understand generator
* I know how everything works
* Authoring content is very fast

## What Needs Work
* RSS/Atom feed generation
* Still a bit ugly
* Projects page is repetitive, maybe projects should be
defined in YAML/etc to make changes and theming easier
* Needs better HTML5 metadata, SEO
* Blog is barebones, needs improvement

## Update: RSS Feeds

As of late 2021 I have added RSS feeds to this site. I wrote a simple script to generate feeds, but it is
missing lots of quality of life. For example, I should include the post body in the feed as most blogs seem
to do. 
